<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Some Commendatory Verses</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="epigraph" epub:type="epigraph">
			<h3 epub:type="title">Some Commendatory Verses<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></h3>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>Urganda the Unknown<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a></p>
					<p>To the book of Don Quixote of la Mancha</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If to be welcomed by the good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O Book! thou make thy steady aim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No empty chatterer will dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To question or dispute thy claim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if perchance thou hast a mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To win of idiots approbation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lost labour will be thy reward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though they’ll pretend appreciation.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They say a goodly shade he finds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shelters ’neath a goodly tree;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such a one thy kindly star</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Béjar bath provided thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A royal tree whose spreading boughs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A show of princely fruit display;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tree that bears a noble Duke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Alexander of his day.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of a Manchegan gentleman</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy purpose is to tell the story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Relating how he lost his wits</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er idle tales of love and glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of “ladies, arms, and cavaliers:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A new Orlando Furioso⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Innamorato, rather⁠—who</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Won Dulcinea del Toboso.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Put no vain emblems on thy shield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All figures⁠—that is bragging play.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A modest dedication make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And give no scoffer room to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What! Álvaro de Luna here?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or is it Hannibal again?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or does King Francis at Madrid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Once more of destiny complain?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Since Heaven it hath not pleased on thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deep erudition to bestow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or black Latino’s gift of tongues,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No Latin let thy pages show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ape not philosophy or wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest one who cannot comprehend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make a wry face at thee and ask,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Why offer flowers to me, my friend?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Be not a meddler; no affair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thine the life thy neighbours lead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be prudent; oft the random jest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Recoils upon the jester’s head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy constant labour let it be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To earn thyself an honest name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fooleries preserved in print</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are perpetuity of shame.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A further counsel bear in mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If that thy roof be made of glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It shows small wit to pick up stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pelt the people as they pass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Win the attention of the wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And give the thinker food for thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso indites frivolities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will but by simpletons be sought.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>Amadís of Gaul</p>
					<p>To Don Quixote of La Mancha</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thou that didst imitate that life of mine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When I in lonely sadness on the great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rock Peña Pobre sat disconsolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In self-imposèd penance there to pine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, whose sole beverage was the bitter brine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of thine own tears, and who withouten plate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of silver, copper, tin, in lowly state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off the bare earth and on earth’s fruits didst dine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Live thou, of thine eternal glory sure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So long as on the round of the fourth sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bright Apollo shall his coursers steer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy renown thou shalt remain secure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy country’s name in story shall endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thy sage author stand without a peer.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>Don Belianis of Greece<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></p>
					<p>To Don Quixote of La Mancha</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In slashing, hewing, cleaving, word and deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I was the foremost knight of chivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stout, bold, expert, as e’er the world did see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thousands from the oppressor’s wrong I freed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great were my feats, eternal fame their meed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In love I proved my truth and loyalty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hugest giant was a dwarf for me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ever to knighthood’s laws gave I good heed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mastery the Fickle Goddess owned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even Chance, submitting to control,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Grasped by the forelock, yielded to my will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet⁠—though above yon hornèd moon enthroned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">My fortune seems to sit⁠—great Quixote, still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Envy of thy achievements fills my soul.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>The Lady of Oriana<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></p>
					<p>To Dulcinea del Toboso</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, fairest Dulcinea, could it be!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It were a pleasant fancy to suppose so⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could Miraflores change to El Toboso,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And London’s town to that which shelters thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, could mine but acquire that livery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of countless charms thy mind and body show so!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or him, now famous grown⁠—thou mad’st him grow so⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy knight, in some dread combat could I see!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, could I be released from Amadís</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By exercise of such coy chastity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As led thee gentle Quixote to dismiss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then would my heavy sorrow turn to joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">None would I envy, all would envy me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And happiness be mine without alloy.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>Gandalin, Squire of Amadís of Gaul</p>
					<p>To Sancho Panza, Squire of Don Quixote</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All hail, illustrious man! Fortune, when she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bound thee apprentice to the esquire trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her care and tenderness of thee displayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shaping thy course from misadventure free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer now doth proud knight-errantry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Regard with scorn the sickle and the spade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of towering arrogance less count is made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than of plain esquire-like simplicity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I envy thee thy Dapple, and thy name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those alforjas thou wast wont to stuff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With comforts that thy providence proclaim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Excellent Sancho! hail to thee again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To thee alone the Ovid of our Spain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Does homage with the rustic kiss and cuff.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>From El Donoso, the Motley Poet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a></p>
					<p>On Sancho Panza and Rocinante</p>
				</header>
				<section id="on-sancho" epub:type="chapter">
					<header>
						<p>On Sancho</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I am the esquire Sancho Pan⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who served Don Quixote of La Man⁠—;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But from his service I retreat⁠—,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Resolved to pass my life discreet⁠—;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Villadiego, called the Si⁠—,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Maintained that only in reti⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was found the secret of well-be⁠—,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>According to the “Celesti⁠—:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>A book divine, except for sin⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By speech too plain, in my opin⁠—</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="on-rocinante" epub:type="chapter">
					<header>
						<p>On Rocinante</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>I am that Rocinante fa⁠—,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great-grandson of great Babie⁠—,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who, all for being lean and bon⁠—,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had one Don Quixote for an own⁠—;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if I matched him well in weak⁠—,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I never took short commons meek⁠—,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But kept myself in corn by steal⁠—,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A trick I learned from Lazaril⁠—,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When with a piece of straw so neat⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The blind man of his wine he cheat⁠—.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>Orlando Furioso</p>
					<p>To Don Quixote of La Mancha</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If thou art not a Peer, peer thou hast none;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among a thousand Peers thou art a peer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor is there room for one when thou art near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unvanquished victor, great unconquered one!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orlando, by Angelica undone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Am I; o’er distant seas condemned to steer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to Fame’s altars as an offering bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Valour respected by Oblivion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot be thy rival, for thy fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And prowess rise above all rivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Albeit both bereft of wits we go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, though the Scythian or the Moor to tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not thy lot, still thou dost rival me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Love binds us in a fellowship of woe.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>The Knight of Phoebus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></p>
					<p>To Don Quixote of La Mancha</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My sword was not to be compared with thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Phoebus of Spain, marvel of courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor with thy famous arm this hand of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That smote from east to west as lightnings fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I scorned all empire, and that monarchy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rosy east held out did I resign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one glance of Claridiana’s eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bright Aurora for whose love I pine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A miracle of constancy my love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And banished by her ruthless cruelty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This arm had might the rage of Hell to tame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Gothic Quixote, happier thou dost prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For thou dost live in Dulcinea’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And famous, honoured, wise, she lives in thee.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<header>
					<p>From Solisdan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></p>
					<p>To Don Quixote of La Mancha</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Your fantasies, Sir Quixote, it is true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That crazy brain of yours have quite upset,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But aught of base or mean hath never yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Been charged by any in reproach to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your deeds are open proof in all men’s view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For you went forth injustice to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for your pains sore drubbings did you get</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From many a rascally and ruffian crew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the fair Dulcinea, your heart’s queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be unrelenting in her cruelty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If still your woe be powerless to move her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such hard case your comfort let it be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Sancho was a sorry go-between:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A booby he, hard-hearted she, and you no lover.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:drama">
				<header>
					<p>Dialogue<br/>
					Between Babieca and Rocinante</p>
				</header>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Babieca</td>
							<td>
								<p>“How comes it, Rocinante, you’re so lean?”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rocinante</td>
							<td class="i1">
								<p>“I’m underfed, with overwork I’m worn.”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Babieca</td>
							<td class="i1">
								<p>“But what becomes of all the hay and corn?”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rocinante</td>
							<td>
								<p>“My master gives me none; he’s much too mean.”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Babieca</td>
							<td>
								<p>“Come, come, you show ill-breeding, sir, I ween;</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td class="i1">
								<p>’Tis like an ass your master thus to scorn.”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rocinante</td>
							<td class="i1">
								<p>“<em>He</em> is an ass, will die an ass, an ass was born;</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<p>Why, he’s in love; what’s plainer to be seen?”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Babieca</td>
							<td>
								<p>“To be in love is folly?”⁠—<b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr></b> “No great sense.”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Babieca</td>
							<td class="i1">
								<p>“You’re metaphysical.”⁠—<b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr></b> “From want of food.”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Babieca</td>
							<td class="i1">
								<p>“Rail at the squire, then.”⁠—<b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr></b> “Why, what’s the good?</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td class="i1">
								<p>I might indeed complain of him, I grant ye,</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<p>But, squire or master, where’s the difference?</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td class="i1">
								<p>They’re both as sorry hacks as Rocinante.”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
